# EECS738 Project3 Says One Neuron To Another
EECS738 Machine Learning course project3. Two deep neural networks have been implemented: a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) with multiple linear layers and a typical Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). Two image datasets are selected: **MNIST** handwriting characters and **GTSRB** traffic sign recognition. Only third-party packages used in all implementations are **numpy**, **pandas**, **python-mnist** and **Pillow**.

## Function Checklist
These functions are implemented manually in this project in a detailed manner:
* Fully-Connected layers.
* Convolutional layers.
* BatchNormalization2d/1d.
* Dropout.
* Maxpooling.
* Activation functions: Sigmoid and ReLU.
* Data loading and data prepossessing (normalization).
* Forwarding and backpropagation using BGD.
* Cross-entropy loss.


## Dataset
* [Modified National Institute of Standards and Technology database (MNIST)](http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/). This is possibly one of the most commonly-used and simplest datasetin image tasks in machine learning, which combines with different images of hand-written digits. The sizes of training dataset and testing dataset are 60,000 and 10,000 each. Though the attached webpage link seems not to be working, the dataset can be directly accessed by package [python-mnist](https://github.com/sorki/python-mnist). Images and grey-scale with a size of 28\*28 each. Ten labels in total ranges from 0, 1, 2... to 9. 
* [The German Traffic Sign Recognition Benchmark (GTSRB)](https://benchmark.ini.rub.de/gtsrb_dataset.html). This is a more chanllenging dataset with images of traffic signs captured in real street views. Each image contains exactly one traffic sign, usually located right at the middle. There are 43 labels in total, representing different types of traffic signs, and more than 50,000 samples. Recognition of these signs is much more difficult and practically significant, as many of the signs have similar shapes and colors. 


## Ideas and Theoretical Basis
* **Training**: Using text only, this is an unsupervised learning problem which can be solved by Baum Welch Algorithm with forward algorithm and backward algorithm, which is similar to Expectation-Maximization algorithm. For every current hidden state, the probability of its every possible state based on previous observations and the prior probability of upcoming observations are calculated, which combines to estimate the probability of 'certainly happen' data under the model setting. Thus, the model parameters can be tuned accrodingly to fit the data (text), which learns 'grammar'.
* **Generation**: Using random seed as the intial state, text can be generated by transfering to states and picking out observations based on learned distributions.
* **Prediction**: Following a similar pipeline as training, the probability of current state can be estimated when model parameters are given. Thus, the best state sequence can be drawn for a certain text, and next words can be predicted using state transfer.

## Setup
### Environment
* Python 3.9
* MacOS or Linux

### Package
* Recommend setting up a virtual environment. Different versions of packages may cause unexpected failures.
* Install packages in **requirements.txt**.
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
``` 
* I've updated my environment to python3.9 and there is inconsistency between my previous project and this one. Sorry for any possible troubles.

## Usage
### Positional & Optional Parameters
* **data**: Dataset name (task) to choose from 'mnist' and 'gtsrb'.
* **-p**: Whether to load pre-trained model parameters. The parameters for MNIST model is saved in ['./paras'](https://github.com/liuzey/EECS738_Project3/tree/main/paras). The parameters for GTSRB model is saved in ['./paras_save'](https://github.com/liuzey/EECS738_Project3/tree/main/paras_save). (Default: False).
* **-s**: Whether to save the trained model parameters (Default: False).


## Result Analysis 
Training records adn results are saved in ['./records'](https://github.com/liuzey/EECS738_Project3/tree/main/records), which shows indeed a decrease in loss. This indicates the training is working in some sense. However, the accuracy doesn't show great improvements.

## Notes
* I find it difficult to choose initial parameters, especially for linear layers in adopted rough propagation/gradient strategy. The large dimensions will often make the results big and shrink difference between features, losing expressive ability in sigmoid activations and causing troubles in exponential calculations in softmax. 
* In the final version, maxpooling and BatchNormaliztion1d are eliminated for simplification. For maxpooling, the backpropagation requires more work. For batch1d, it makes values deviated largely and result in minus values, which requires more 

## Schedule
- [x] Set up a new git repository in your GitHub account
- [x] Pick a text corpus dataset such as https://www.kaggle.com/kingburrito666/shakespeare-plays or from https://github.com/niderhoff/nlp-datasets.
- [x] Choose a programming language (Python, C/C++, Java). **Python**
- [x] Formulate ideas on how machine learning can be used to model distributions within the dataset.
- [x] Build a Hidden Markov Model to be able to programmatically: 1.Generate new text from the text corpus. 2.Perform text prediction given a sequence of words.
- [x] Document your process and results.
- [x] Commit your source code, documentation and other supporting files to the git repository in GitHub.

## Reference
* MNIST - Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MNIST_database
* GTSRB Dataset - Institut für Neuroinformatik. https://benchmark.ini.rub.de/gtsrb_dataset.html
* Python-mnist - Github. https://github.com/sorki/python-mnist

